=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Sereal - A binary serialization format

=head1 SYNOPSIS

This repository is the home of the Sereal data serialization format. This
format was started because the authors had technical reasons for producing
a better Storable.

Before we embarked on this project we had a look at various prior art. This
included a review of Google Protocol Buffers and of the MessagePack protocol.
Neither suited our needs so we designed this, liberally borrowing ideas from
the other projects.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

=head2 OBJECTIVES

=over 4

=item References

We wanted to be able serialize shared references properly. Many
serialization formats do not support this out of the box. 

=item Weak References

Perl has the concept of a special type of reference called a
"weakref" which is used to create cyclic reference structures which do
not leak memory. We need to handle these structures.

=item Aliases

Perl supports aliases which are a special kind of reference which is 
effectively a C level pointer instead of a Perl level RV. We needed 
to be able to represent these as well.

=item Objects

Blessing a reference can be dangerous in some circumstances. We needed 
to be able to serialize objects safely and reliably, and we wanted a
sane control mechanism for doing so.

=item Regexp Objects

In Perl, a regexp is a native type. We wanted to be able serialize these
at a native level without losing data such as modifiers.

=item Space Efficiencies

We want to be able to represent common structures as small as is
reasonable. Although not to the extreme that this makes the protocol
error prone. This includes such thing as removing redundancy from the
serialized structure (such as hash keys or classnames) automatically.

=item Speed Efficiencies

We want to be able to serialize and deserialize quickly. Some of the design
decisions and trade-offs were aimed squarely at performance.

=item Separate Decoder and Encoder

We wanted to separate the functions of serializing from deserializing
so they could be upgraded independently.

=item Forward/Backward Compatibility

We wanted the protocol to be robust to forward/backwards compatibility
issues. It should be possible to partially read new formats with an
old decoder, and possibly output old formats with a new decoder.

=item Language Agnosticism

We want the format to be usable by other languages, especially dynamic
languages. We hope to have a Java port soon, right Eric?

=back

=head1 SPECIFICATION

A serialized structure is converted into a "document". A document is made
up of two parts, the header and the body.

=head2 General Points

Sereal is a little-endian data structure. Additionally it uses IEEE 754
floats.

=head2 Header Format

A header consists of multiple components:

   <MAGIC> <VERSION-TYPE> <HEADER-SUFFIX-SIZE> <OPT-SUFFIX>

=over 4

=item MAGIC

A "magic string" that identifies a document as being in the Sereal format.
The value of this string is "=srl", and when decoded as an unsigned 32 bit
integer on a little endian machine has a value of 0x6c72733d.

=item VERSION-TYPE

A single byte, of which the high 4 bits are used to represent the "type"
of the document, and the low 4 bits used to represent the version of the
Sereal protocol the document complies with.

Up until now there has only been one version of sereal released so the
low bits will be 1.

Currently only two types are defined:

=over 4

=item 0

Raw Sereal format. The data can be processed verbatim.

=item 1

Compressed Sereal format, using Google's Snappy compression internally.

=back

Additional compression types are envisaged and will be assigned type
numbers by the maintainers of the protocol.

=item HEADER-SUFFIX-SIZE

The header includes support for additional arbitrary data to be embedded
in the header. This is accomplished by specifying the length of the suffix
in the header with a varint. Headers with no suffix will set this to 0.

=item OPT-SUFFIX

The suffix may contain whatever data the encoder wishes to embed in the
header. In version 1 of the protocol the decoder will never look inside
this data. Later versions may introduce new rules for this field.

=back

=head2 Body Format

The body is made up of one or more tagged data items:

    <TAG> <OPT-DATA>

=over 4

=item TAG

A tag is a single byte which specifies the type of the data being decoded.

The high bit of each tag is used to signal to the decoder that the
deserialized data needs to be stored and tracked and will be reused again
elsewhere in the serialization.

Some tags, such as POS, NEG and ASCII contain embedded in them either
the data (in the case of POS and NEG) or the length of the OPT-DATA
section (in the case of ASCII).

=item OPT-DATA

This field may contain an arbitrary set of bytes, either determined
implicitly by the tag (such as for FLOAT), explicitly in the tag (as in
ASCII) or in a varint following the tag (such as for STRING).

=back

=head3 Tags

=for autoupdater start

=for autoupdater stop

=head1 AUTHOR

Yves Orton E<lt>demerphq@gmail.comE<gt>

Damian Gryski

Steffen Mueller E<lt>smueller@cpan.orgE<gt>

Rafaël Garcia-Suarez

Ævar Arnfjörð Bjarmason

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This protocol was originally developed for Booking.com. With approval
from Booking.com, this module was generalized and published on CPAN,
for which the authors would like to express their gratitude.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2012 by Steffen Mueller
Copyright (C) 2012 by Yves Orton

=cut

